[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
charlie state and
naga manchester our headlines today
a 500 pound payment to everyone who
tests positive for covert 19
one of the ideas in a leaked government
document
as ministers look for ways to encourage
more people to stick to the rules
the race against time and care homes to
get residents vaccinated in the face of
growing
numbers of deaths from covid
good morning burnley are celebrating
something rather special they become the
first team in nearly four years
to win at the home of the champions
liverpool in the premier league
and it's frosty and icy out there this
morning but there will be some showers
around and plenty of sunshine in the
east i'll have all your details coming
up
right here on breakfast
[Music]
good morning it's friday the 22nd of
january our top story this morning
anyone
who tests positive for coronavirus in
england could
be in line for a 500 pound payment and a
new plan is being considered by the
department of health
it's one of a number of options being
discussed to improve stay-at-home
compliance
there are concerns that the current
financial support isn't enough
and that some low-paid workers cannot
afford to self-isolate
we're joined now by our political
correspondent ben wright
so ben this we understand is amongst a
number of
ideas do you want to take us through the
principles of the idea and where it is
in terms of the decision-making process
within government
sure morning charlie well look clearly
it's imperative
from the government's perspective that
people go and get tested if they have
symptoms of covid
and then they self-isolate if they are
confirmed to have the virus
or they're contacted by nhs uh test
track and trace now for people who are
on who are on very low incomes this is
obviously something that they worry a
lot about
losing income if they have to stay at
home for 10 days and the government have
put financial incentives in place
since september last year there's a
scheme called nhs test and trace support
payment scheme which if you're in work
but on a low income uh can't work from
home
and receive a number of benefits you
might be eligible for there's also a
top-up grant scheme that's administered
by local authorities in england
but the take-up of that doesn't seem to
be very high at the moment it's quite
hard to get the money
so there is a review in whitehall
underway about how to make those
financial incentives that financial
cushion
for people who have to sell isolate
better now this proposal that we're
talking about this morning
is giving 500 pounds to everybody who
has to self-isolate that's what's being
reported in the guardian
you spoke to george eustis the
environment secretary earlier on
breakfast
and this is what he said about the idea
we've always had the
500 pound support payment for those that
are on certain benefits
we've always kept this under review and
we know that it's uh sometimes quite
challenging to ask people to isolate for
that length of time
of course at the moment we're in a full
lockdown anyway so
while people can leave to work in many
cases people will be staying home
in a way but we constantly keep this
under review we've got to consider all
sorts of policies
george eustis saying that there is a
review going underway that these things
are always looked at
the issue around financial compensation
for people on low incomes having to
self-isolate
i don't think though this is something
that the government is about to do
a government source told me this morning
a senior source said that this paper
talked about in the guardian was drawn
up by officials it's never been near the
prime minister
and there are fears in government it
could create perverse incentives
uh the cost to the treasury from
extending for extending this to
everybody who has to self-isolate
would be huge i think it's about two
billion pounds a month but there's
clearly a discussion underway
within whitehall about what to do ben
thank you
lockdown restrictions in northern
ireland have been extended until at
least
the fifth of march first minister ali
foster said she understood people would
be disappointed but said the measures
are an appropriate and necessary
response let's talk to our island
correspondent chris page um chris
morning two coming to us from belfast um
how
unexpected was this um and there's that
feeling i think a lot of us are thinking
well
we knew this was going to be a lot
longer than
anyone hoped for
yeah i think people here as in probably
anywhere else in the uk have been
resigned
to the fact that there's a lot of
pressure on the health service that that
is going to continue for
a few weeks and that really ministers
don't have much option
but to be looking at longer lockdown
measures so
lockdown here came into force about four
weeks ago on boxing day so
for example here in belfast city center
the
most shops have been closed all
non-essential retailers aren't allowed
to open leisure facilities closed
too we now know that rather than that
ending
at the start of february well it's going
to go on uh a month longer until the 5th
of march and there was a pretty strong
hint yesterday actually that
ministers could look at this again in
the coming weeks and decide to extend
lockdown further perhaps to easter
in the first week of april or even
beyond that one big
unresolved question is schools they've
been
moved to remote learning so far for this
term ultimately the children of key
workers who are actually
in schools on a day-to-day basis but
that was due to go on
until the february half term but then
the plan was for children to
go back to school however that is now
under review in line with the
other lockdown measures so ministers
will consider over the next week or two
whether to extend the closure of schools
to
for most pupils until the 5th of march
as well as everything else
okay chris thanks for taking us through
all of that chris page there coming to
us from belfast
president biden has set out a national
strategy to combat coronavirus
describing the task
as a wartime undertaking it will include
the production of more vaccines and
increased testing it's after the new
commander-in-chief warned that the worst
of the pandemic is still to come
here's more from our north america
correspondent peter bose
the day started with a prayer a moment
of reflection before the new president
got down to work with a stack of
executive orders to be signed
joe biden wasted no time in putting pen
to paper
a signature is all it takes to reverse
some of donald trump's key policies
and to reinvigorate a coronavirus effort
that mr biden said
had been a dismal failure the death toll
will likely top
five hundred thousand next month the
cases will continue to mount
we didn't get into this mess overnight
it's going to take months for us to turn
things around
but let me be equally clear we will
get through this the plan is ambitious
according to mr biden one of the
greatest operational challenges
america has ever undertaken a hundred
million doses of the vaccine
in a hundred days working alongside joe
biden
a familiar face dr anthony fauci
america's leading
infectious disease expert who is part of
the trump administration's coronavirus
task force
he said mr biden's approach with the
federal government taking control of the
vaccine rollout
could see normal life returning by the
autumn
the concern i have and something we're
working on
is getting people who have vaccine
hesitancy who don't want to get
vaccinated
because many people are skeptical about
that so we really need
to do a lot of good outreach for that
i mean i don't know what the best case
the best case scenario
for me is that we'd get 85 of the people
vaccinated by the end of the summer
dr fauci also reflected on the sometimes
awkward relationship he had with donald
trump
especially when the former president
said things that weren't based on
scientific facts
the idea that you can get up here and
talk about
what you know what the evidence what the
science is
and know that's it let the science speak
it is somewhat of a liberating feeling
the goal now according to dr fauci is to
rebuild the trust of americans
as the war on the coronavirus moves into
a new phase
peter bose bbc news los angeles
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the
app and get the full story with bbc dot
co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news